PSR-0 Autoloading
=================

In this practical, you are going to create a
[PSR-0](https://github.com/php-fig/fig-standards/blob/master/accepted/PSR-0.md)
compliant autoloader.


Definition
----------

The following describes the mandatory requirements that must be adhered to for
autoloader interoperability.

### Mandatory

* A fully-qualified namespace and class must have the following
  structure `\<Vendor Name>\(<Namespace>\)*<Class Name>`
* Each namespace must have a top-level namespace ("Vendor Name").
* Each namespace can have as many sub-namespaces as it wishes.
* Each namespace separator is converted to a `DIRECTORY_SEPARATOR` when
  loading from the file system.
* Each `_` character in the CLASS NAME is converted to a
  `DIRECTORY_SEPARATOR`. The `_` character has no special meaning in the
  namespace.
* The fully-qualified namespace and class is suffixed with `.php` when
  loading from the file system.
* Alphabetic characters in vendor names, namespaces, and class names may
  be of any combination of lower case and upper case.

### Examples

* `\Doctrine\Common\IsolatedClassLoader` => `/path/to/project/lib/vendor/Doctrine/Common/IsolatedClassLoader.php`
* `\Symfony\Core\Request` => `/path/to/project/lib/vendor/Symfony/Core/Request.php`
* `\Zend\Acl` => `/path/to/project/lib/vendor/Zend/Acl.php`
* `\Zend\Mail\Message` => `/path/to/project/lib/vendor/Zend/Mail/Message.php`

### Underscores in Namespaces and Class Names

* `\namespace\package\Class_Name` => `/path/to/project/lib/vendor/namespace/package/Class/Name.php`
* `\namespace\package_name\Class_Name` => `/path/to/project/lib/vendor/namespace/package_name/Class/Name.php`

The standards we set here should be the lowest common denominator for
painless autoloader interoperability. You can test that you are
following these standards by utilizing this sample SplClassLoader
implementation which is able to load PHP 5.3 classes.


Overview
--------

Four steps to achieve your goal:

* implement autoloading from cache;
* implement autoloading from namespace;
* implement autoloading using underscore notation;
* register the discovered classes in cache and dump it.

Get [the
code](https://raw.github.com/willdurand-edu/php-practicals/master/files/psr0.tgz):

    vagrant@vm $ cd $DOCROOT
    vagrant@vm $ wget https://raw.github.com/willdurand-edu/php-practicals/master/files/psr0.tgz
    vagrant@vm $ tar xvfz psr0.tgz
    vagrant@vm $ rm psr0.tgz
    vagrant@vm $ cd psr0

Running the `tree` command should display the following:

    .
    ├── generate.php
    ├── test.php
    ├── test_cache.php
    ├── test_namespace.php
    ├── test_underscore.php
    └── vendor
        ├── Coffee
        │   ├── Bali.php
        │   ├── BlueMontain.php
        │   └── Sumatra.php
        ├── Soda
        │   ├── Juice
        │   │   ├── Orange.php
        │   │   └── Pineapple.php
        │   └── Lemonade.php
        ├── Wine
        │   ├── Bordeaux.php
        │   └── Chinon.php
        ├── autoload.php
        ├── autoload_cache.php
        ├── autoload_namespace.php
        └── autoload_underscore.php

Every class under `vendor/` directory prints its name in the constructor:

``` php
<?php

class Foo
{
    public function __construct($log = true)
    {
        if ($log) {
            printf("%s\n", get_class($this));
        }
    }
}
```


Step 1: Register A New Autoloader
---------------------------------

The [SPL](http://php.net/spl) allows you to register a custom autoloader through
the `spl_autoload_register()` and `spl_autoload_unregister()` methods.
This part will be tested thanks to the `test_cache.php` script.

Register a closure as an autoloader in `vendor/autoload_cache.php`.
The closure MUST use the following associative array:

``` php
$autoload_map = [
    'Coffee\Bali'        => 'Coffee/Bali.php',
    'Coffee\BlueMontain' => 'Coffee/BlueMontain.php',
    'Coffee\Sumatra'     => 'Coffee/Sumatra.php',
    'Soda\Lemonade'      => 'Soda/Lemonade.php',
    'Soda\Juice\Orange'  => 'Soda/Juice/Orange.php',
    'Wine\Bordeaux'      => 'Wine/Bordeaux.php',
    'Wine\Chinon'        => 'Wine/Chinon.php',
];
```

Now, test your code:

    vagrant@vm $ php test_cache.php

You should see:

    Coffee\Bali
    Coffee\BlueMontain
    Coffee\Sumatra
    Soda\Lemonade
    Soda\Juice\Orange
    Wine\Bordeaux
    Wine\Chinon



Step 2: Guess Path From Namespace
---------------------------------

Fix the `vendor/autoload_namespace.php` file to load classes based on namespaces.

Test your code:

    vagrant@vm $ php test_namespace.php

You should see:

    Coffee\Bali
    Coffee\BlueMontain
    Coffee\Sumatra
    Soda\Lemonade
    Soda\Juice\Orange
    Wine\Bordeaux
    Wine\Chinon


Step 3: Load SnakeCase'd Class Names
------------------------------------

Fix the `vendor/autoload_underscore.php` file to successfully execute
`test_underscore.php`.

**Hint:** Don't Repeat Yourself (DRY), in other words, reuse the work that has
been done before.

Then again, test your code by running:

    vagrant@vm $ php test_underscore.php

You should see:

    Soda\Juice\Pineapple


Step 4: Combine'em All
----------------------

Fix the `vendor/autoload.php` file in order to fully comply to PSR-0.

The following steps SHOULD be executed:

* Load cache file;
* check whether the class is already in cache, if so load it;
* find class in definition map and add it to the cache;
* save cache array in `vendor/cache.php` using the `var_export()` method.

---

You can jump to: [Practical Work #2 - Part 2](2-2.md).
