Practical Work #3
=================

Some parts of your micro-framework are missing. You have to complete the missing
parts. Then, you have to improve your framework, and build a real application.

Today's goal is to create a simple PHP application to **C**reate, **R**etrieve,
**U**pdate, and **D**elete tweets. This is called a **CRUD** application. You
will not implement the **U**pdate part though.


Insight
-------

You are going to build the next awesome social network. The idea is to create an
application a la Twitter, but with a truly RESTful API.

Twitter is about sending short messages (140 chars) over the Internet, and let
people know what you are doing, thinking, or even eating... Sometimes, people
write useful messages.

Your application will deal with **statuses**. Users can create, or delete
**statuses**, which are the so called tweets. It is not possible to update a
status. A status MUST contain at most 140 characters. Anyone can read statuses
from others.

A status contains a message, and is identified by an identifier, probably a
numeric id. Each status owns a date. Also, the name of the user who creates a
status is embedded into this status. It is also possible to specify the client
that has been used to send a status (iOS, Android, or web browser for instance),
but it is optional.


1 - Think!
----------

This application will respect **REST** conventions, that means, **at least**,
the use of HTTP verbs, and consistent URIs. All routes will be declared in
`app/app.php` as follows:

```php
// Create
$app->post('...', $callable);
// Read
$app->get('...', $callable);
// Update
$app->put('...', $callable);
// Delete
$app->delete('...', $callable);
```

`$callable` can be either a closure, an array or a function name.  More on this
in the [PHP manual](http://php.net/manual/en/language.types.callable.php).

It is recommended to use closures:

```php
function ($params) use ($something) {
    // controller code
}
```

**Your first job** is to take a piece of paper, a pen, and to write your world's
domination plan. Well, at least write the API methods you need in a REST-style:

```
GET /something
POST /...
...
```

The important thing here is to determine what you want to achieve **before**
writing your application. The use of a sheet of paper is **mandatory**!  **Your
teacher MUST validate your plan.**


2 - The "Read" Part
-------------------

### Improve &micro;Framework's Kernel

The applications's kernel is defined in `src/App.php`, and has been altered.
Complete the `registerRoute()` method.

Then, in the `App` class, add the `put()`, `post()`, and `delete()` methods.

Check everything is ok by **running the test suite**.

### The Model Layer

Create a `InMemoryFinder` class in `src/Model`. This class MUST implement the
`Model\Finder` interface.

"In memory" means that the storage is a simple PHP array. Add fake data in this
array. This allows you to quickly build your application, without taking care of
the database. It is a **Code-First approach**.

### Your First Routes

First, try to list all statuses.

Then, write a new controller to list a specific status, identified by an `id`
parameter. You should write two templates, one for the list view, another one
for the detail view.

`get()`, `post()`, `put()`, and `delete()` methods all take a **regular
expression** as first argument. It defines the pattern for each URI you want to
implement.

Assuming the following definition:

``` php
$app->get('/foo/(\d+)', function ($id) use ($app) {
});
```

It will match all URIs starting with `/foo/` and finishing with a number
(`/foo/0`, `/foo/1`, `/foo/123`, etc.).

You can declare more parameters if you want:

``` php
$app->get('/foo/(\d+)/bar/(\d+)', function ($fooId, $barId) use ($app) {
});
```

`(\d+)` is a regular expression that matches numbers only, but you can match
whatever you want. Note that using numbers as identifiers is a good idea.

This number (`0`, `1` or `123` in the examples) will be injected as argument of
the closure, that's why we declare a `$id` parameter. Use this parameter to
retrieve the corresponding status.

If you can't find a status for a given id, then you should throw a
`HttpException` with status code set to `404` which stands for `Not Found`.
Look at the `HttpException` class, the first argument is the status code, and
the second one is a message.

Check everything works.

### A Basic Model Persistence

Statuses will now be stored in `data/statuses.json`. Create a `JsonFinder` class
that implements your `Finder` interface.  You will not rely on a PHP array
anymore. Instead, use a file to store data, so that you can persist new statuses
between two requests.

To manipulate JSON, SPL defines both `json_encode()` and `json_decode()`
methods. Use the [PHP manual](http://php.net) to know how to use these methods
in order to create a persistent model layer.


3 - The Request
---------------

You should know that a web application is about converting a _request_ into a
_response_. A client sends a request to a server, and the server returns a
response.

In &micro;Framework, there is no `Request` class, and it is quite bad. That is
why you will create it in `src/Http/Request.php`:

``` php
<?php

namespace Http;

class Request
{
}
```

### Using The Request In &micro;Framework

1. Modify the method `run()` in the `App` class to take an optional `Request`
object as parameter.

2. Move the constants (`GET`, `POST`, etc.) from the `App` class to the
`Request` class, and updates the `App` class to use them.

3. Create the first two new methods in the `Request` class:

* `getMethod()`: returns the method (aka HTTP verb);
* `getUri()`: returns the URI.

Look at the code of the `run()` method in the `App` class to know how to
implement these methods.

The URI is what you described in previous practical. Add the following code to
the `getUri()` method:

``` php
if ($pos = strpos($uri, '?')) {
    $uri = substr($uri, 0, $pos);
}
```

It will remove the query string from the `REQUEST_URI` value:

    /statuses?foo=bar

What we want here is `/statuses`. The query string starts after the `?` sign:
`foo=bar`.


4. Use these methods in the `run()` method of the `App` class:

``` php
public function run(Request $request = null)
{
    $method = $request->getMethod();
    $uri    = $request->getUri();

    // ...
}
```

5. Implement a **static** method in the `Request` class to create a new
`Request` instance. This method **MUST** be named `createFromGlobals()`.

Returning an instance of the current class can be achieved using the following
code:

``` php
return new self();
```

This method will contain more logic later, but by now, it should just return a
new instance.

6. Update the `run()` method to create a `Request` object if the argument is
`null`:

``` php
if (null === $request) {
    $request = Request::createFromGlobals();
}
```

### Using The Request In Your Application's Controllers

At the moment, your `Request` class does not do a lot of work. You only moved
some code into it. Actually, it is better for something we call **Separation of
Concerns**: it is Request's responsibility to determine the _method_ used by the
client.

You know that a web application is about converting a _request_ into a
_response_. In a **Model View Controller** architecture, this is handled by the
**Controller Layer**. It seems like a good idea to inject the `Request` in your
controllers:

``` php
$app->get('/statuses', function (Request $request) use ($app) {
});
```

You may wonder why we do not pass the `$request` instance in the closure's
context. That is a good question, thank you for asking! You can consider the
closure's context as a _shared_ or _global_ context, and the _request_ is not
shared. It is always different.

In order to inject the `Request` in your controllers, you will have to modify
the `App` class. First, you have to pass the `$request` instance from the
`run()` method to the `process()` method.

Then, update the code of the `process()` method to add the `$request` as first
argument:

``` php
$arguments = $route->getArguments();
array_unshift($arguments, $request);

$response = call_user_func_array($route->getCallable(), $arguments);
```

Now, it will automatically inject a `Request` instance **as first argument**  in
your closures.

> **Reminder:** The **Controller Layer** is located in the `app/app.php` file. A
> specific _controller_ is represented by a _closure_ in the application.

### Abstracting Global Variables

In PHP, you can access data via `$_GET` and `$_POST`. You could use them, but
now that you have a `Request` class, you should rely on it.

> **Note:** Avoid the use of global variables in your code, as much as you can.
> Use classes that can abstract these variables. That's why you have a `Request`
> class.

Add a constructor method to your `Request` class:

``` php
__construct(array $query = array(), array $request = array())
```

`$query` is an array of `GET` parameters (`$_GET`). We use the term `query` as
these parameters are part of the **Query String**.

`$request` is an array of `POST` parameters (`$_POST`). We use the term `request`
as these parameters are part of the **Request Body**.

Declare a new attribute named `$parameters` in your `Request` class, and
initialize it in the constructor by merging both `$query` and `$request`.

Implement a new method:

``` php
public function getParameter($name, $default = null)
{
}
```

Modify the `createFromGlobals()` method to inject the global variables.

### Fixing The Browser

You know that a RESTful application leverages the HTTP verbs. Unfortunately, web
browsers only support `GET` and `POST`. In order to by pass this limitation, we
will use a _hack_.

The hack consists in using a hidden parameter in the request that defines the
real HTTP verb the client wants to use. In a form, you will set the `POST`
method, and use a hidden field named `_method` with the real HTTP verb:

``` html
<form action="..." method="POST">
    <input type="hidden" name="_method" value="PUT">
</form>
```

Modify the `getMethod()` method in your `Request` class to use this hack. This
snippet could be useful:

``` php
if (self::POST === $method) {
    return $this->getParameter('_method', $method);
}
```


4 - The "Write" Part
--------------------

### Creating New Resources

In a RESTful application, we use the `POST` HTTP verb to create new resources,
and we "post" data to the collection. It is also possible to "put" a new
resource at a given URI, but you won't have to do that.

In your application, you will have to "post" data to `/statuses`. It will call
the corresponding action registered in your application:

``` php
$app->post('/statuses', function () use ($app) {
    // this is the corresponding action
});
```

> **Note:** Generally speaking, the term **action** represents a method in a
> controller. As you don't use a controller class, but a closure, the term
> **action** represents this closure.

In a browser, you can call this action by using a `form`. The following code
could be added to the `app/templates/statuses.php` template:

```
<form action="/statuses" method="POST">
    <label for="username">Username:</label>
    <input type="text" name="username">

    <label for="message">Message:</label>
    <textarea name="message"></textarea>

    <input type="submit" value="Tweet!">
</form>
```

The user data will be accessible through the `Request` object.

``` php
$request->getParameter('foo');
```

Once you created a new status, redirect the user to the list. It should be done
for two reasons:

* if the user reloads the page, it won't create a new status again;
* it's better for the user experience.

Redirecting the user requires a new method in the `App` class:

``` php
public function redirect($to, $statusCode = 302)
{
    http_response_code($statusCode);
    header(sprintf('Location: %s', $to));

    die;
}
```

Now you can redirect the user to the list view by using:

``` php
$app->redirect('/statuses');
```

> **Note:** a REST API should return a `201` status code which stands for
> `Created`. It will be useful for the next practical. By now, you can
> live without that. It also adds a `Location` header with the URI of the
> resource that has just been created.

### Deleting A Resource

In a RESTful application, we use the `DELETE` HTTP verb to delete resources, and
we "delete" a resource.

In your application, you will have to "delete" a resource at `/statuses/id`. It
will call the corresponding action registered in your application:

``` php
$app->delete('/statuses/(\d+)', function (Request $request, $id) use ($app) {
});
```

The first thing to do in this function is to retrieve your model object by its
identifier. You can rely on the `findOneById()` method, part of the `Finder`
interface.

If the object does not exist, you will get `null`. In this case, you will have
to return a `HttpException` with status code `404` which stands for `Not Found`:

``` php
throw new HttpException(404, "Object doesn't exist");
```

If you get an object, then you can delete it.

As we saw in section _Fixing The Browser_, we can't use the `DELETE` keyword in
your form, so we need to use a special parameter, using a hidden field, and the
`POST` method in the form:

The following could be added to the `app/templates/status.php` template:

```
<form action="/statuses/<?= $id ?>" method="POST">
    <input type="hidden" name="_method" value="DELETE">
    <input type="submit" value="Delete">
</form>
```

Redirect the user to the list view.

> **Note:** A REST API should return a `204` status code which stands for `No
> Content`.<br>You will need this information in the next practical.

---

You can jump to: [Practical Work #4](4.md).
