Practical Work #4
=================

The goal of this practical work is to implement a simple content negotiation
layer in your &micro;Framework, and to make your application a bit more REST
compliant.

1 - Meet Composer
-----------------

You will now use [Composer](http://getcomposer.org) to manage your project, and
its dependencies.

In your project, create a `composer.json` file with the following content:

```json
{
    "require": {
    },
    "autoload": {
        "psr-0": { "": "src/" }
    }
}
```

Now, run:

```bash
vagrant@vm $ composer install
```

### Replace Your Autoloader With Composer's One

When you run `composer install`, it "installs" project's dependencies in a
`vendor/` directory but also generates an autoloader file in
`vendor/autoload.php`. That one is optimized, and probably better than yours.
Moreover, it's automatically generated, and you don't need to waste your time on
that part.

In `app/app.php`, replace the autoloader with `vendor/autoload.php`.

You can safely delete the `autoload.php` file you wrote in the previous
practical work.

### Fixing The Test Suite

If you run the test suite, it should fail because the autoloader setup has
changed.

Edit the `tests/boostrap.php` file, by replacing its content with:

``` php
$loader = require __DIR__ . '/../vendor/autoload.php';
$loader->add('', __DIR__);
```

Be sure to understand what it does.


2 - Content Negotiation
-----------------------

Content Negotiation is part of the HTTP protocol, used to serve a resource in
the best format for a client. You can read [RFC 2616:
HTTP/1.1](http://pretty-rfc.herokuapp.com/RFC2616) and [RFC 2295: content
negotiation](http://pretty-rfc.herokuapp.com/RFC2295) if you want more
information.

Content negotiation means that a single resource can be presented in different
ways, depending on the client preferences. To achieve this goal, **HTTP
headers** (`Accept`, `Accept-*`) are used by a client to tell the server about
its preferences.

Your application should be able to serve resources in:

* `HTML` using a template;
* `JSON` encoded data.

The HTML part has been done in the previous practical work.

The JSON part is what you have to do in this practical.

Your implementation will also accept parameters encoded in:

* `application/x-www-form-urlencoded` - used when you submit a HTML form;
* `application/json`.

### Guessing The Best Format To Return

It's _Request_'s responsibility to resolve the best format to serve, so you need
a `guessBestFormat()` method in this class.

[Negotiation](https://github.com/willdurand/negotiation) will help you get the
best format from headers by handling content negotiation. The `Accept` header
**could** be found in `$_SERVER['HTTP_ACCEPT']`.

Create the `guessBestFormat()` method as specified. Rely on the Negotiation
library if you think it's worth using it ;-)

### Decode Parameters Based On the Content Type

When a request has a body, it should provide a `Content-Type`.  This content
type header is available in either `$_SERVER['HTTP_CONTENT_TYPE']` **or**
`$_SERVER['CONTENT_TYPE']`. You have to check both variables, and **order
matters**.

Modify the `createFromGlobals()` method to convert a JSON content
(`application/json`) into parameters, and use them as _request_ parameters.

This snippet can be useful:

``` php
$data    = file_get_contents('php://input');
$request = @json_decode($data, true);
```


3 - The Response
----------------

To fit the HTTP protocol, every response should contain at least:

* a `Content-Type` header to describe the content;
* a status code to give feedback on what happened;
* the content (or body) of the response.

That makes a lot of things to handle, it cannot all fit into the `App` class.

A `Response` class will be in charge of the response configuration:

```php
<?php

namespace Http;

class Response
{
    private $content;

    private $statusCode;

    private $headers;

    public function __construct($content, $statusCode = 200, array $headers = [])
    {
        $this->content    = $content;
        $this->statusCode = $statusCode;
        $this->headers    = array_merge([ 'Content-Type' => 'text/html' ], $headers);
    }

    public function getStatusCode()
    {
        return $this->statusCode;
    }

    public function getContent()
    {
        return $this->content;
    }

    public function sendHeaders()
    {
        http_response_code($this->statusCode);

        foreach ($this->headers as $name => $value) {
            header(sprintf('%s: %s', $name, $value));
        }
    }

    public function send()
    {
        $this->sendHeaders();

        echo $this->content;
    }
}
```

Update the `process()` method in the `App` class to use this new class. The PHP
function `call_user_func_array()` can be useful.

**Important:** it should be possible to return either a string as you used to do
**or** directly a `Response` object.


4 - Formatting Your Data The Right Way
--------------------------------------

HTML rendering is achieved through your template engine. Rendering your data in
other formats is called _serialization_. Serialization is the process of
converting a data structure or object state into a format that can be stored.

The serialization is handled by a Serializer. This serializer can be as simple
as the `json_encode()` function or you can use the [Serializer
Component](http://symfony.com/doc/current/components/serializer.html).

Use the new methods created in the `Request` class, and return a `Response` with
the right content/headers, in each controller's function. You can rely on the
Serializer component, but using `json_encode()` is easier.

You can use an anonymous function to factorize some code, or extend the
`Response` class. Just saying...

**Important:** always set the right status code to the response. It has been
described in the previous practical work.

### Testing

In a terminal, try these commands:

    $ curl -XGET -H "Accept: application/json" http://localhost:8082/statuses
    $ curl -XGET -H "Accept: application/json" http://localhost:8082/statuses/1
    $ curl -XGET -H "Accept: application/json" http://localhost:8082/statuses/1000

Also, try to create new statuses using JSON:

    $ curl -XPOST -H "Accept: application/json" -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        -d '{"message": "Hello", "username": "..."}' \
        http://localhost:8082/statuses

Using [Goutte](https://github.com/fabpot/Goutte) or [Buzz
](https://github.com/kriswallsmith/Buzz) HTTP clients, you can create a simple
script executing scenarios to test your application.

If you feel like using [PHPUnit](http://phpunit.de/) to implement your tests, go
ahead, it will be useful for your whole PHP developer life!
