Practical Work #5
=================

The aim of this practical work is to design a stronger Model Layer, by using
database design patterns seen in class, but also by relying on a database
engine provided as a [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) container.

In order to persist the data of the container, you have to create a _data-only
container_, which is a special container that should never stop and store all
the data for another container. A core concept of Docker is to provide
containers that do not have any persistence, hence the concept of [data-only
containers](http://container42.com/2013/12/16/persistent-volumes-with-docker-container-as-volume-pattern/):

``` bash
$ docker run -d \
    --volume /var/lib/mysql \
    --name data_mysql \
    --entrypoint /bin/echo \
    busybox \
    "mysql data-only container"
```

Now, we can tell Docker to: (i) fetch the
[`mysql`](https://github.com/tutumcloud/mysql) image, (ii) run a Docker
container, (iii) use the data container created previously, and (iv) initialize
MySQL with a user/password and a database:

``` bash
$ docker run -d -p 3306 \
    --name mysql \
    --volumes-from data_mysql \
    -e MYSQL_USER=uframework \
    -e MYSQL_PASS=p4ssw0rd \
    -e ON_CREATE_DB=uframework \
    tutum/mysql
```

Here, we chose to publish (`-p` option) the MySQL port (`3306`) but we did not
specify any "local" port. Type `docker ps` to get the port.

On your machine (or `hina`), try to connect to the database:

``` bash
$ mysql uframework -h127.0.0.1 -P<assigned port> -uuframework -p
```

If you want to stop the container, you can execute the following command:

``` bash
$docker stop mysql # or its ID
```

To start the container again:

``` bash
$docker start mysql # or its ID
```

**Important:** if you want to run the MySQL container again, you have to run the
following command:

``` bash
$ docker run -d -p 3306 \
    --volumes-from data_mysql \
    tutum/mysql
```


The Connection
--------------

Write a SQL script named `app/config/schema.sql` to create a `statuses` table.
This script MUST be written in SQL that is also MySQL compliant. It should be
repeatable, so be sure to add a check if the table already exists for instance.

Executing your SQL from the command line can be done that way:

``` bash
$ mysql <database> -h<host> -P<port> -u<user> -p<password> < app/config/schema.sql
```

Be sure to replace `<host>`, `<port>`, `<database>`, `<user>`, and `<password>`
with the appropriate values. There is no space between `-h`/`-P`/`-u`/`-p` and
their corresponding values, this is not a mistake!

Udate your Model Layer to manipulate a database rather than a file. In order to
do that, you have to:

* use [PDO](http://php.net/manual/book.pdo.php);
* use a `Connection` class as described in class;
* use the `Connection` instance to execute queries.

You can create another class which implements the `Finder` interface, and
replace the instance of `JsonFinder` in your code, by an instance of this new
class. Choose an appropriate name for such a class.

The `Connection` should be instantiated in `app/app.php` only once. That way,
the whole configuration part is located in a single place.

The `find*()` methods will not use the `executeQuery()` method, you will have to
write your own logic to return the data (_hint:_ `FETCH_ASSOC` can become your
new friend).

You MAY need to update the templates.

Now, check everything still works.


The Model Class
---------------

Create a `Status` class which represents a single status if it is not done yet.
Be sure to write clean code (ie. avoid setters).

For dates, use `DateTime` instances. Optional values are **nullable** in PHP:

```php
class Foo
{
    /**
     * @var string
     */
    private $required;

    /**
     * @var string|null
     */
    private $optional;

    public function __construct($required, $optional = null)
    {
        $this->required = $required;
        $this->optional = $optional;
    }
}
```

Use the class you have created in your project.


The Data Mapper
---------------

Create a class that implements the **Data Mapper** design pattern. This class is
responsible for persisting and removing your statuses.

**Useful:** the `Y-m-d H:i:s` format is the one used by MySQL for its `DATETIME`
type.

Now you should have a cleaner Model Layer containing:

* a DAL thanks to the `Connection` class;
* a Data Mapper to persist/remove Plain Old PHP Objects (POPO);
* a Finder to perform queries and retrieve sets of POPOs.


Filtering The Results
---------------------

At the moment, your API returns collections of resources. **But**, what if you
want to return the last 5 statuses? Or the statuses between two dates?

First of all, you need to understand how a client will perform a request for
such a use case:

    GET /statuses?limit=5&orderBy=createdAt

This literally means:

    Give me the last 5 statuses

If you decompose the URI, the client adds two parameters to the **query
string**: `limit` and `orderBy`.

* `limit` stands for _"number of results to return"_;
* `orderBy` is a criterion.

This criterion will be passed to the Model Layer, in order to fetch the results
the right way. In this example, the results in the database will be ordered by
date.

The SQL query will look like:

``` sql
SELECT * FROM statuses
ORDER BY created_at
LIMIT 0, 5
```

Your job is to modify your `Finder` to allow the use of criteria.

Your `find*()` methods need a `$criteria` parameter. This parameter will modify
the SQL queries by adding SQL clauses like `LIMIT`, `ORDER BY`, `WHERE`, and so
on.

You can write tests to prove everything works fine.

Now, update your controllers to allow filtering the results. It only makes sense
on collections. You should be able to:

1. limit the number of results;
2. order results by a given column and a given direction (`ASC` or `DESC`).


Testing
-------

Software testing is a **requirement** for all developers. Your job is **not** to
write code, it is all about providing solutions for given problems. The right
solution is always the one that works.

The question is: how do you ensure that your solution works? You cannot rely on
the well-known _it works on my machine™_. This is just silly. What you need to
do is to provide a set of automated tests.

Tests are more than just _assertions_ on some properties of your application,
it is also the best documentation you can provide to your customers/users because
tests are always up to date.

For all these reasons, you have to learn how to write tests.

### Unit Tests

Unit testing is ll about testing some parts of your application in a **white
box** approach. The main idea is to test algorithms, methods, functions one by
one. That does not mean you have to test your `private` methods, because these
methods should be used by your `public` methods anyway. You have to focus on
**behaviours**, so you don't need to test getters/setters or logic less methods.

In [his last
talk](https://dl.dropbox.com/u/3615626/slides/PHPUnit-Best-Practices-Fosdem-2013.pdf),
[Volker Dush](https://twitter.com/__edorian), a PHPUnit contributor, provides a
good sample:

``` php
<?php

public function setValue($value)
{
    $this->value = $value;
}

public function execute()
{
    if (!$this->value) {
        throw new Exception('No Value, no good');
    }

    return $value * 10; // business logic
}
```

In the code above, what should you test? The answer is:

* if you don't call `setValue()` calling `execute()` will throw an exception;
* if you do call `setValue()` calling `execute()` will return the computed
  result.

So we are testing **two behaviors** of the class and **not the methods in
isolation**! This is really **important**!

The PHP unit testing framework in PHP is named [PHPUnit](http://phpunit.de).
Look at the `tests/` directory in &micro;Framework.

In this part, your job is to test your Model Layer. For instance, the
`DataMapper` class requires a `Connection` instance to work. You will not
provide a real `Connection` instance here, because you don't want to use a
database in order to run your tests.

Unit tests should not contain hard dependencies to external services. In order
to avoid that, we often rely on **mocks**. A **mock** is an implementation that
you control in your tests.

Creating a mock is relatively easy. PHPUnit has its own mocking framework:
[http://www.phpunit.de/manual/3.0/en/mock-objects.html](http://www.phpunit.de/manual/3.0/en/mock-objects.html).

Mock the `Connection` to return the executed SQL queries, and compare them to
queries you expect to execute.

This can be useful to ensure your `persist()` method distinguishes the state of
the object. Note that `PDO` cannot be mocked out of the box. You have to extend
it, and avoid to call its constructor:

``` php
<?php

class MockConnection extends Connection
{
    public function __construct()
    {
    }
}
```

Now, you can mock your `Connection`:

``` php
<?php

$this->getMock('MockConnection');
```

### Functional Tests

Next week!

---

You can jump to: [Practical Work #6](6.md).
